# "Best practices" and why you shouldn't follow them

I've been writing code for myself for a little while now. Looking at my github profile, I've been at it since at least 2018. I was 15 at the time! All young and dumb, but I did know one thing: I didn't know anything. So, as the good soon-to-be-professional programmer that I was, I understood that my only hope to improve and write to better code was, of course, to listen to people more experienced than me, to follow *best practices*, to use the *best tools*. After all, I was young and dumb, of course I wouldn't get anywhere by just writing code as I felt. -snip-

And then, last year, I had to make something completely new (an app), for a completely new platform (Android), by learning a completely new framework (Flutter), while working with completely new people. We had a vague plan set out for us, but none of us had any experience with this sort of thing. Well, looks like I was back to being young and dumb again!

## You can lead a horse to water

So, naturally, not wanting to write code that was gonna be thrown away[^1], I preemptively started looking into best practices for things we already knew we'd need. One of these is sharing and updating state across the app and all its different components, screens, and layers. An unavoidable part of making any useful app, and some could argue the central problem most UI frameworks try to address in some way or another. Thankfully, a quick search brought up [this "Simple app state management" official guide](https://docs.flutter.dev/data-and-backend/state-mgmt/simple) -- and it's "*simple*," how lucky! Oh, there was also [another guide just titled "State management"](https://docs.flutter.dev/get-started/fundamentals/state-management), in a different part of the docs. and [another one](https://docs.flutter.dev/data-and-backend/state-mgmt/intro). [How many of these is there anyway??](https://docs.flutter.dev/data-and-backend/state-mgmt)

[^1]: Especially given that, while not strictly *short on time*, we did only have limited time (and had started late because of external factors), and we had to report our advancement to a "product manager." None of us wanted to be the one saying they wrote an entire app just to start from scratch.

As a complete noob to GUI and app development, I have to admit I was a little overwhelmed; but, after all, the more best practices, the bester the practices, right? Skimming the docs, and cross-referencing with sample apps, reddit threads and small github repos, it seems like the starting point was an innocent-looking package called [`provider`](https://pub.dev/packages/provider).